---
title: 'Close Encounter with pandas and the Jedis of open source'
published: November 14, 2022
authors: [dennis-chukwunta]
description: 'Learning from awesome mentors and contributing to pandas open source'
category: [Community, Developer workflows, OSS Experience, PyData ecosystem]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/close-encounter-with-pandas-and-the-jedis-of-open-source/blog_hero_lightsaber.jpg
  alt: 'An illustration of a hand holding up a lightsaber, with some graphical elements highlighting the glowing plasma and a pandas face'
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/close-encounter-with-pandas-and-the-jedis-of-open-source/blog_hero_lightsaber.jpg
  imageAlt: 'An illustration of a hand holding up a lightsaber, with some graphical elements highlighting the glowing plasma and a pandas face'
---

(The opening crawl) A long time ago (2008) in a [company](https://www.aqr.com/)
far, far awayâ€¦

â€¦pandas was created. Come 2009 it was open-sourced and it's currently, and
actively, being supported by a community of like-minded individuals around the
world who contribute their valuable time and energy to help make open-source
pandas possible.

This is a blog about my journey as an intern for Quansight contributing to the
Pandas Library and my interactions with the "_Force-sensitive_" mentors and
maintainers that made the journey a success.

Featuring mentors like [Noa Tamir](https://github.com/noatamir) as Noa, [Aaron
Meurer](https://github.com/asmeurer) as Aaron, [Jaime
RodrÃ­guez-Guerra](https://github.com/jaimergp) as Jaime, and [Melissa Weber
MendonÃ§a](https://github.com/melissawm) as Melissa.

### The opening

There will only be a journey with first being a captain to navigate. Melissa is
the captain of this voyage and one of the incredible developers from Quansight
Labs that is responsible for organizing the internship this year. She introduced
us to the team, broke down the internship timeline and I got to know my project,
pandas, as well as mentors, Noa and Aaron.

The need for a padawan to have a mentor was apparent immediately. Setting up the
environment was not as straightforward as creating a virtual environment and
installing packages from requirements.txt. Building the environment with the pip
package manager required that some packages be installed on my local machine as
a pre-requisite. Not knowing what these packages were meant that I had to keep
bumping into dependency issues. From missing packages like Postgres, Cython, to
an hdf5 nut that was a little hard to crush. I talked with my mentor, Noa, and
discovered she uses an M1 mac just like I did. With her guidance, I checked out
other alternatives on the pandas documentation. I discovered that the conda
package manager was better equipped to handle setting up the environment and
building the package locally. Further discussions with my mentor, Aaron, filled
in the gap in my knowledge about the various missing packages and revealed the
solution to fix it.

### Standing up to pandas

I wasted no time in jumping straight to the issues I was assigned. This was a
mistake. These issues were related to pandas standardization (like consistency
in how pandas handle empty inputs, removing the `inplace` argument from most of
pandas operations, and consistency for pandas column names and more) but, as I
am new to the project, I found most of the issues overwhelming. So many
discussions have been made on the issues but not much of a general consensus on
how they should be tackled. Luckily for me, I didn't need to have midichlorians
to contribute and, most of all, I had mentors. Noa suggested that I tackle
simpler issues to familiarize myself with the project and learn the steps
required to make contributions to pandas.

Three issues and three pull requests later, I learned about building the Cython
library every time I pulled new changes from remote origin, how to always do
pre-commit, how to write proper tests, how to submit issues and pull requests,
and how to document fixes.

### Comments, tests, and a table

> Being a developer is more than just typing code

Having been involved in other internships, with the most recent being the [MLH
Fellowship](https://fellowship.mlh.io) and
[Outreachy](https://www.outreachy.org/), I had to write a significant amount of
code which was my metric for measuring a developer at the time. This idea nursed
a little bit of doubt in me as an intern who was doing more reading and
communicating rather than writing code. But luckily "*being a developer is more
than just typing code*", paraphrasing Melissa's comment when I made a
pseudo-complaint about my internship experience thus far (barely a month in at
the time).

Since most people working on open-source projects are usually not paid to make
contributions, there are lots of features to be implemented, tests to be
performed and documentation to write. Noa mentioned that part of being a
maintainer was doing actual maintenance and this involves things like "testing
all pandas operations with empty inputs and documenting the findings",
"improving the documentation for some operation or method" or "writing an
internal documentation for a feature".

There was a need to understand what was expected and having read the already
cold discussion on the issue to maintain consistency for panda's operation on
empty inputs, it turned out though that there haven't been many tests written on
empty inputs and some of the results are a little unpredictable. For example,
given

```python
    import pandas as pd

    empty_df = pd.DataFrame({"a": [], "b": []})
    gb = empty_df.groupby("a", group_keys=True)
    group = getattr(gb, "b")
    group.apply("sum")
    # Returns an empty series, which is understandable since the group is empty.
    # But trying to get a sample of an empty group, returns an error
    group.sample()
    # Returns ValueError: need at least one array to concatenate

```

Making this discovery was only possible because my mentors had advised me to
create a list of pandas operations and tested them with empty inputs. It was
really brilliant because it gave a very clear picture of the various
inconsistencies in handling empty inputs and allowed for interest in the issue
to be rekindled. Here are some examples of GroupBy methods acting on empty
dataframes:

`apply()`:

```python
 df = pd.DataFrame(data={'root_id': [], 'side': []})
 df.groupby(['root_id'])
   .apply(lambda x: x['side'].iloc[0])
# IndexError: single positional indexer is out-of-bounds
```

`take()`:

```python
df = pd.DataFrame({'a': [], 'b': []})
df.groupby('a').take([0])
# IndexError: single positional indexer is out-of-bounds
```

`sample()`:

```python
df = pd.DataFrame({'a': [], 'b': []})
df.groupby('a').sample()
# ValueError: need at least one array to concatenate
```

`boxplot()`:

```python
df.groupby('a').boxplot()
# ValueError: Number of columns must be a positive integer, not 0
```

### Gaining an audience with pandas' Jedi Council

Communicating these findings was the next challenge. There wasn't a clear
understanding for me of what consistency needed to be maintained. I created a
few issues, made some pull requests, and got very few responses and comments.
More discussion was needed. Noa, being an excellent communicator, secured an
audience with some pandas maintainers and after a few comments from maintainers
like [Joris Van den Bossche](https://github.com/jorisvandenbossche), [Richard
Shadrach](https://github.com/rhshadrach) and [JHM
Darbyshire](https://github.com/attack68), a better picture on what is expected
and the best approach to fixing the issue was painted.

### Debugging, ain't like dusting crops

One of the most exciting parts of my internship has been learning how
experienced developers went about debugging and solving problems. Jaime held a
live-coding section where he did exactly that with a project he was working on
for conda forge. It was an issue with errors on the CI (continuous integration)
that wasn't reproducible on his local machine. He had a list of hypotheses and
he meticulously updated this list as new information was presented from each fix
he attempted. It was obvious that "_the force is strong with this one_" and I
had so much fun learning and laughing at both the situation and his jokes (he's
a very funny jedi ðŸ˜†).

Aaron had a very particular way of seeing a problem and accessing a possible
solution. It involved looking at how other packages handled similar problems,
trying out examples, and debugging using the python debugger, PuDB. This was a
new tool for me as I previously had to rely on using print statements or the VS
code debugger (which was pretty much a hit-or-miss with every configuration for
a new project). After just one live session with him and an
[article](https://asmeurersympy.wordpress.com/2010/06/04/pudb-a-better-python-debugger/)
written by him back in 2010 that I found on the internet, I was equipped with a
newfound power for improving productivity. Instead of having a bunch of print
statements that don't necessarily show you the state of the program during
execution and the call stack, I can simply just add breakpoints and pass the
_â€”-pudb_ flag when calling the program and have access to all those information.
Awesome!ðŸ˜Ž

### A UDF, a regression, and a fix

Most of the operations that had inconsistencies with empty inputs were quite
easy to fix once the general consensus was for an empty DataFrame/Series to be
returned if the input is empty (and not an error message), but this didn't fix
the case for UDFs (user-defined functions).

```python
    import pandas as pd

    empty_df = pd.DataFrame({"a": [], "b": []})
    gb = empty_df.groupby("a", group_keys=True)
    group = getattr(gb, "b")
	  # Given the UDF
	  def last_value(gb):
        return gb.values[-1]

    # The inconsistency
	  group.agg("sum") # Returns an empty Series
	  # But
	  group.apply(last_value) # Returns IndexError
```

This was a regression issue. Further investigation revealed that as at pandas
1.4 this issue did not exist. In other to maintain consistency I needed to know
the particular update to blame for this behavior. Aaron suggested I check out
git bisect. It uses binary search to find the commit that introduced a bug.
Really cool. ðŸ¤“

> Understanding the problem is more than half the solution

After a few conversations and making a few suggested fixes, a solution that
maintained consistency with the older version and passed all tests for the
current version was selected. The fix was easy; if the groups*key equals zero it
means the input was empty and if the function being called on the group isn't
one of these aggregate functions *("mad", "skew", "sum", "prod")\_ then the
function won't be called. Proper tests were written (revisioned several times to
properly convey the fix and cover all known corner cases) and the fix was
merged.

### Internal documentation, the journey ahead, and a new hope

The last few weeks of my internship were interrupted by some unforeseen events.
An unfortunate encounter with some corrupt law enforcement officers (a daily
struggle in my country) and an immediate mandate to return back to school
(thrust me straight into exams) after seven months of industrial strike action.
Fortunately for me, through the help of my mentors, I got an extension on my
internship (more time to focus on writing this blog and closing all open
issues). I am working on writing internal documentation for GroupBy. GroupBy is
a big part of pandas and this issue proved to be tougher than I thought as
internal documentation requires some background knowledge of the thought process
adopted at the time when a feature was been implemented (these are usually
hinted at with comments in the code but still they aren't always sufficient in
providing clarity).

The internship might have come to an end, with me writing this blog, but the
journey from Tatooine is only just beginning. I intend to maintain a
relationship with my mentors at Quansight and the maintainers at pandas.

It really has been a journey of enlightenment, knowledge, fun, connection,
growth, and Force Awakening.

I have a greater appreciation now for maintainers in Open Source and I hope to
become a major maintainer myself someday. [_"It's like poetry, they
rhyme"_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yFqFLo_bYq0).ðŸ˜‰

### Closing credits - Everyone gets a medal

Condensing my internship experience into this blog post hasn't really been a
breeze. So many activities and lesson learned has been left out. The weekly
activities like Qshare, where developers discuss on what they are working on,
internship share, where interns discuss on their progress, issues, and
limitations and so many other activities that promote connection, collaboration,
and a sense of community. I had such a great time meeting the people that
contribute to improving the PyData ecosystem.

My special thanks to all the members and staff of Quansight Labs and the pandas
maintainers. It really has been an incredible experience being part of the
community.
