---
title: 'Will Python Be #1 Forever?'
published: June 1, 2020
author: troy-bailey
description: >
  Based on the data collected by http://pypl.github.io/, over the last 5 years, PHP and Java declined in popularity while Python's popularity rose. Sometime in 2018, Python became the most popular language. But Python probably won't be #1 forever. If history is any indication, no language can maintain the premier position in language popularity indefinitely. I'm sure there were many who believed that Java would never be replaced as #1.
category: [Open Source Software, PyData Ecosystem]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/python-forever/python-1-img-gallery.png
  alt: ''
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/hero-paris.webp
  imageAlt: 'Data visualization of Paris city'
---

<base target="_blank" />

Based on the data collected by [PYPL][pypl page] and shown in the chart below,
over the last 5 years, PHP and Java declined in popularity while Python's
popularity rose. Sometime in 2018, Python became the most popular language. But
Python probably won't be #1 forever. If history is any indication, no language
can maintain the premier position in language popularity indefinitely. I'm sure
there were many who believed that Java would never be replaced as #1.

![](/posts/python-forever/python-1-img-1.png)

_(Image source: [PYPL][pypl page])_

But that certainly does not mean that Python is going away completely. Virtually
none of the languages that have come to prominence in the past have disappeared
yet. They continue on as legacy code. Looking at the bottom right of the same
chart, we see that people are still learning to code in Cobol and Ada. The last
Cobol programmer on the planet will probably be the highest paid programmer on
the planet. We also see that a newcomer, Rust, is quickly climbing the chart.
Will it be the new #1 someday?

So the questions more relevant than "will Python stay #1 forever?" are: "when
will Python fall out of prominent use?," "why?," and "should we care?"

I'll take the "should we care?" question first. When a new language comes to
prominence, sometimes it is addressing an entirely new need. In those cases all
the work of creating software in the language is new and the value is additive
so there is no real cost to the industry driven by the emergence of a new
language. In most cases however, there is some overlap between the applications
of the new language and existing languages. When there is overlap, that means
that work needs to be done to convert code from the old language to the new or
to do integration between the old and new languages. This costs time and money.
Re-training developers to use the new language is also a significant cost. When
you consider the amount of money the world puts into software every year, even a
partial overlap between the old and new prominent language can represent
billions of dollars. So the answer to "should we care?" is "yes". For the
software industry—and any industry that uses software—transitions in languages
are costly. For individual developers it can mean potential skill obsolescence.
In this sense it would be best for everyone if the current top languages could
dominate forever. But that has never happened yet.

The question of "when" Python will decline is really impossible to answer with
any precision. It is hard to say when a new language or application will cause
Python to start its descent into obsolescence. One thing we can say is that the
transition will not be quick.

There is a great deal of momentum to a prominently used language. There is the
momentum of the code in many applications that have cost billions of dollars to
create. If those applications are still doing their job, they will not be
rewritten until they no longer work.

Then there is the momentum of libraries that have been written to extend a
language. Python is unusual in that it has a relatively small language core
supplemented by additional code to add functionality. Its creator, Guido van
Rossum, intended it to be a highly extensible language meaning that libraries
could be easily written to extend its core functionality into many domains. And
that has happened in a big way. A huge community of developers have written
libraries to add functionality to the Python core. These libraries range from
machine learning, to visualization, database access, web applications, and the
list goes on. The official repository for Python third party libraries, PyPi,
now contains over 230,000 libraries. Again, these represent billions of dollars
of investment that will take time to replace even if the incentive to change is
strong.

And finally there is the momentum of the talent base. Inevitably, when there is
a new "hot" language coming to prominence, there is a shortage of experienced
developers. All this means it takes time to transition from one language to the
next no matter how strong the benefits of changing are.

The question of "why" Python will eventually fall from prominence will be
because either it has some shortcomings that a new language fixes or there is a
new application that Python is not suited to perform efficiently. Again it is
impossible to predict the new application that will obsolete existing languages.
It's much easier to discuss the strengths that led to the Python's popularity
and to also consider the weaknesses in Python that could open the door for a new
language.

The strengths of Python are well-known: its readability and dynamic typing led
to its rapid adoption by domain experts in many fields, its extensibility led to
the creation of many, many libraries that brought even more users, and its
diverse and global community has led to a robust foundation enabling
contributions from anyone.

The weaknesses of Python are also well documented. The item that often tops the
lists is Python's speed. Python is an interpreted language meaning that, unlike
compiled languages, the human written code is converted (interpreted) to machine
executable code at the time of execution rather than ahead of time (compiled).
This interpretation step means that runtime speed is lower than compiled
languages.

Another attribute of CPython (the most widely used implementation of Python)
that is often cited as a weakness is the GIL or Global Interpreter Lock. In an
age of massive hardware parallelism (such as GPUs with thousands of hardware
cores), a per-interpreter lock means that only one thread (of CPython bytecode)
can execute at the same time. This means that certain patterns of concurrency
are not well suited for the Python interpreter. Python developers have found
ways to address both the speed and concurrency (or scaling) limitations of the
interpreter. Python is an extensible language meaning that you can access code
written in other languages from within Python code. Developers take advantage of
this to speed up python by writing compute intensive algorithms in a compiled
language like C. These compiled segments of code can run on many cores and on
GPUs where they look to the Python interpreter as one compute-heavy instruction.
There are even solutions like Cython and Numba that make it easy to use Python
syntax to create compiled code, and therefore, compiled language performance
from a Python program.

However, the common methods of getting speed and scale into your Python
run-times are implementation dependent meaning that you have to commit to a
certain underlying runtime solution for Python such as CPython. Your Python code
is no longer portable to other, incompatible Python runtime implementations
paradigms such as PyPy, Jython (Java), IronPython (.NET), MicroPython (IOT), and
Brython (web).

Portable performance and scale are Python's achilles heel. It has other
weaknesses but these are the ones most likely to open the door for another
language to replace Python. So we should be keeping our eyes out for languages
with all (or most) of the benefits of Python without the portable performance
limitations as the signal that Python is on its way out.

Or we could figure out better ways to add portable performance and scale to
Python...but that is the subject of a future post.

[pypl page]: http://pypl.github.io/
